You should message everything. What is this? How was it? Okay, I think we'll get underway. That's Is it working? Yeah, it's working. Okay. Okay. So, Okay. Hopefully that's a bit better. All right. Okay. So, not no feedback there by the Let me turn the down a bit. So, then okay. So, we move on to module two. today structure to function of microbes. Um so we completed module one last week with the workshops um workshop assessment. Um I'll have those results up. I've got to check your your um identification your tree. So I need to mark all of those individually. So it's going to take me a day or so to get that done. I haven't got on to it yet um given that it only closed at 12 today. So um hopefully I'll get some of that done tomorrow. and Wednesday. So, they should be up by Wednesday. Okay. Hopefully tomorrow if I can get get a roll on with it. Um, okay. So, yes. So, don't expect them up straight away. So, probably Wednesday, I would say they'll be up by. Um, I'm hoping that everyone's gone pretty well in it. So, hopefully it wasn't too difficult as I said in the workshops. Um, all right. So, that round rounds out module one. I'll put some revision material up. there. So, there's some multiple choice questions, some short answer questions, um, good revision for you. Um, so plenty of those questions to work on for module one in preparation for the for the quiz that we have in week six on modules one and two, and I'll talk more about that in the next couple of weeks. Um, try those questions. I've also put our answers up for those questions. Obviously, try them before you um, check the answers. Okay, so there's two different files there you probably would have seen plus the um overall lecture summary and key points that we did in um for module one. So again I'll do the same for module two and three as we go through them. Um okay so back to module two. Okay so it's the structure function of microbes we're going to cover and the way we're going to cover it the first two topics are going to be on viruses. So we'll just be doing viruses today. Um we'll see whether we get through them all. I've got a couple of examples to finish it off. Um maybe they'll be carried over onto onto Friday. Normally I don't get through those um in the first day because by the time I get through viruses and explaining viruses um the examples um are usually carried over at least one or two of them maybe. Um so that we'll get through most of that anyway today and then we'll move on to topics 3 to eight which are the cellular microbes. Okay. So our microorganisms. So first two topics viruses and the rest on our microorganisms. Okay, our readings. Okay, so in rock biology microorganisms 16th edition chapter 2 will cover just about all you need to know about the cellular organisms. Okay, so both editions 16 and 15. Chapter 2 will cover um what you need to know about the cellular microorganisms and um chapters 5 and 11 in the 16th edition on viruses. Okay, so chapter 5 is more the introductory of viruses. Chapter 11, part one is a bit more in depth and we cover some of that um today as well. And the corresponding chapters in the 15th edition, chapter 8 and chapter 10 part one. So they've really just changed around the chapters. Content's pretty much the same in the two um editions on what we're covering here. Okay. So we start off our first topic and that is viruses in general. Okay. So, uh what are viruses, etc. Okay. So, we're going to go into that. Um structure, function. We're going to obviously have a look at the structure of them, the function of them, some examples as we go go along as well with the with the different viruses we see. Okay. So, our topic one, yeah, I've just put in as viruses. Okay. Um and what are they? Okay. So, as we saw um the last module, we saw they're asellular or non cellular if you like. Okay. So, they're not cells. So, we don't call them microorganisms. It's why again I say why I call deal with microbes more than microorganisms in this course because that sort of that covers viruses we're looking at. We study them in microbiology because they are submicroscopic and they are infectious. Okay. So that's largely why we do cover them in microbiology. In reality vi ver viology is a separate subd discipline again of microbiology. Okay. So there are people who are biologists and um covered under the broad banner of of microbiology if you like. They are quite range of have a quite range of sizes different sizes depending on the virus itself. Um most will fit within that 10 to 300 nanometer range. Okay, which is just sub light microscopic. Okay, so again you're dealing with your electron microscopes to be able to see most of your viruses. There are exceptions as there are exceptions to everything in microbiology. There's some larger ones and we'll I'll give you a couple of examples of those we go along. We know viruses infect all cells, okay? Not just us, um not just animals, but plants and other microbes, not just ukarotic microbes either or ukarotic microorganisms, but proarotes as well. Okay? So, they infect bacteria and there's a lot that infect bacteria and they're probably some of the most studied particularly one is the most studied of all viruses. Okay, we call those that infect bacteria as bacteria. Okay, or fagges for short. You might have heard the term fage or bacteria fage. That's what it is just a virus that infects bacteria. Okay, and we usually extend that to araffect in infecting proariots. Okay, so obviously there's viruses there that infect ara as well. Okay, so any cellular organism, none of them are exempt, none of them are um uh immune to viruses. So all cells, okay? So as I say, everything from us right through to your um bacteria and even some of your smallest bacteria as well. We sort of they're obligate parasites. They need a host cell. They won't multiply without a host cell. They're dormant outside a host cell. Okay? So they don't do much outside. Okay? So and they're most of them are relatively easy to kill once they're outside a host cell. Okay? So we do we we do through sanitization measures can remove viruses once they're outside a host cell. So they the reason why they're obligate parasites is because they don't have their own metabolism. Okay? So they can't multiply themselves and that's why they're dormant outside a host cell. Once they get in a host cell, they take over the host cell basically and start to reproduce themselves. All right? So usually it's only the genome that needs to go into the virus. Although some viruses, well a lot of viruses, the whole virus, a lot of um host cells, the whole virus goes into them. But it's really only that genome which is important part. Okay? Because that holds the blueprint for reproducing more viruses. Okay? And that's what the virus wants. That's all it wants, just to be able to reproduce. So we describe an infection by a virus as the viral genome getting into that host cell and starting to reproduce. Okay? Starting to produce the parts to the virus gets put together and then it gets released from the host cell. Now that might mean lis of the host cell or it might not mean lis of the host cell. Okay, so there's various ways in which a virus can exit a host cell. We call the complete virus a virion. Okay, so the term viron if you've ever heard of it is just a complete virus. It's what all it is and this is what a complete virus looks like in some instances. There are quite a lot of variations on what a virus will look like. Okay. So the basic virus is just this which is its genome its nucleic acid surrounded by a protein coat we call a capsid. Now protein coats made up of protein subunits called capsime. Okay. So that's the simplest form of a virus. Okay. And there's a lot of viruses out out there that just look like that. Okay. That just have that structure. Some of them will also have a lipid envelope surrounding them. Okay. So So lipid envelope. So you have the the um genome surrounded by the protein coat and a lipid envelope outside of that. The lipid envelope will always have what are called spike proteins in it. Okay? Cuz those spike proteins are really important. Take those away and the virus can't infect because they're what bind to the receptors on the host cell. So they recognize where what cell to bind because sometimes it can be very specific virus binding to a host cell. and they recognize those receptors and bind to those receptors. All right, but I'll talk more about envelope virus as we go along. Okay, the whole thing is called a nucleioapsid. Okay, so nucleioapsid is just a nucleic acid genome and a capsid surrounding it. Okay, that is a nuclear capsid. Okay, so envelope in some instance they'll have an envelope surrounding them but not always. Okay. So, some will have lipid envelopes. Others are composed are more complex and composed of different parts. But that's usually a proteinbased part which make them up. Okay. Those different parts of them. Some will contain enzymes and other um um proteins within them which are important in the production of new viral particles. Okay. So for instance, lysosyme. Lysosyme breaks down cell walls in bacteria. So bacteria many bacteria vages will have lysosyme within the virus. Okay? So that enables it to get through the cell wall of bacteria because most bacteria have cell walls as you'll find out on when we do cell walls. I think that's Friday. So you'll find out or could run over till next Monday. Not quite sure yet. Um so they they will have lysosyme and lysosyme puts basically breaks down the cell wall or puts at least puts a pore in the cell wall and enables the the viral genome to get into the cell. Neuromminadases, okay, they cleave uh cialic acid. Okay, so that's on the host cell and that enables them to to uh bind and penetrate into a host cell often animal cells. Okay, so um binding to the glyoproteins and enable them to get into a host um cell. Nucleic acid polymerases that's helps them reproduce or replicate the genome or produce um RNA reverse transcript dasises to produce DNA from RNA. So they might have specialty proteins or specialty enzymes that they need okay within the the virus. Okay, viral genome. This is where they differ very much from our cells. Okay, obviously all cells have DNA as the genetic material within the cell. Okay. Okay. So the primary storage of information within a cell is in DNA. But viruses can have DNA or RNA. Okay. So their genome can be DNA or RNA. And it can be single stranded or double stranded. Okay. So we know all cells have double stranded DNA. Okay. That's a storage information storage in the cell. But viruses can have double strand or single stranded. Likewise RNA can be double stranded or single stranded. And Then there's other viruses which can have either RNA or DNA at different stages when they're being reproduced. Okay. So they but they are one or other of the partic grouped as one or other of the particular viruses either such as retroviruses are actually single stranded class as singlestranded RNA viruses but they produce DNA once they get into a host cell okay on their own without relying on the host cell. So they'll have reverse transcription. days which enables them to produce DNA from that RNA and another group which are um hepatiruses which are doublestranded DNA viruses which will also produce themselves RNA. Okay, some other viruses that are DNA virus for instance will need to produce RNA but they rely on the host cell to do it. Okay, where these ones can do it themselves. These last two groups morphology What does a virus look like? What's its shape? There's probably two major type two major shapes of a virus. Okay, there are a third group which we call complex viruses which I'll get to in a moment. But most viruses have one of two shapes. One is an what's called an icosahhedral shape which is basically a 20 20sided polygon looking something like that. Okay, all these triangular faces, 20 of these triangular faces. Okay, they are made up of the capsime obviously. Okay, and they can look different depending how you look at them down the microscope. Okay, so electron microscope. Okay, so depending on what face you're looking at. Okay, twofold, three-fold or five-fold face. All right, the simplest um form of icosahhedral virus is a 60 capsime subunit um virus okay in the protein coat. So basically each of these faces has only three caps. So that's the smallest simplest form of icosahedral. Okay. So you might have three capsums here, three here, three here, three here, etc. And you add them all up and there's 60 of them. Okay? 60 caps. Most viruses will have more. Okay? The more um complex they are, the more capsum they will have. Okay? So that's basically If we're looking at here is a triangular face there. And if you're looking at it straight on that triangular face, yep, that's what look like a three-fold appearance. And you'll be looking at these caps here. Okay. So there's something I think there's 21 capsum in this face. But if you're looking at from the five-fold angle here, it will look something like this. Okay. So you're looking at the vertex with the capsime surrounding that vertex. Okay? So you can end up having your an electron microscope. You can be looking at your capsameir shapes looking something like that or sorry a kosahhedral shape capsu looking something like that and you can see the spike proteins coming off the outside. Okay, many instances if they are are not enveloped they don't have capsameir proteins. Some of them do but many they don't spike proteins I should say many of them don't have spike protein sticking out like this because the capsuameirs act as the protein that binds to the cell surface. Okay, host cell surface the receptors on the health host cell surface. Okay, so there's another example of um icosahedral shape and this is um an added adeno virus and adeno viruses are well known for um causing respiratory infections some of them such as your cold virus um sore throat they can cause um your adeno viruses. Okay, depending on what virus it is. Human papilloma virus um again another icosahhedral shape. Okay, so clusters of five caps here and human papilloma virus. You probably heard of that one before. It causes sexually transmitted disease and in rare cases causes cervical cancer. Okay, so some viruses we do know cause cancers. That's roughly about 20% of cancer. Cancers can be caused by viruses these days. Up until probably about 20 years ago, we didn't even know that viruses cause cancer. Okay? But now it's widely accepted um ever since a virus called Epstein bar virus was um found to cause cancers. And I'll talk a little bit more about that later as we go on. Um causes lymphoma Epstein bar virus. The second type of um shape of the of the virus that we can get is a helical shape. Okay. Okay. So, helical shape is where we have our genome here. This case an RNA genome and it's surrounded by protein or capsime the protein subunits here. Okay. In a in a spiral shape, okay, so it looks like a long filament as a result of that. And this one's tobacco mosaic virus here. Tobacco mosaic virus. And that was the first virus ever discovered. Okay. So, I mentioned back in the late 1800s um by Dmitri Ivanowski, a Russian scientist, Russian microbiologist/furologist, was the first to discover viruses. And how he did that was he was um looking at infections in tobacco plants. And um he found that he couldn't find a bacterium that was causing those infections in the tobacco plants. And um he he decided to filter some of the sap that was coming out of the tobacco plants and found found that when he filtered it, um the filtrate still was infectious. Okay. So, even though he filtered it through filters, pores sizes that were too small to to um allow bacteria to pass through, he found the filtrate was still causing infections. Okay. So, it was what he found were viruses in that filtrate which were small enough to put pass through the um 2 micron filters which would normally retain any bacteria and The last group of um structures are a general group called complex structures. Okay. So complex structures can take various shapes. Okay. So they as I say the majority are either your oosahedral or the helical but there are quite a number with complex structures as well particularly of the pox virus group. Okay. Or pox virus family. All right. So small pox, monkey pox, cowpox. Okay. All of those viruses have this complex shape where they have the genome in the center and they have a double protein or double membrane layer. They have a protein coat surrounding it but not in the shape of a helical shape or an icosahedral shape. Sort of a I don't know almost a peanut type shape there. Okay. And then there's a membrane surrounding that. And then they have another membrane sur or another um protein another lipid envelope surrounding it. Okay. So A lipid envelope is virtually like a membrane as we'll get to shortly. Um, but they'll have a lipid envelope, two lipid envelopes surrounding them. Okay? So, they are termed complex because they are usually larger than most other viruses and they don't take the helical or icosahhedral shapes. Okay, let's have a look at the envelope viruses. Okay, so how and why some are enveloped. Okay, so your envelope viruses looks something like this. You got the icosahhedral shape here. You got the genome in the center. You got your protein code over here. And you've got your um and you've got your lipid envelope surrounding it. Okay. And your spike proteins. Okay. So, this is actually um influenza virus here. Okay. So, you see the the spike proteins. Two types of spike proteins in influenza virus. We'll see later on. Okay. And a helical or it can be a helical shaped virus here. with the lipid envelope surrounding it and a few proteins associated with that lipid envelope. Those yellow regions inside the lipid envelope and again the spike proteins there and we see an electron microraph. You can clearly see the spike proteins around here. You can't quite see the lipid envelope but you can see the spike proteins surrounding. Okay, we find that envelope viruses largely infect animal cells. Okay, mostly infect animal cells. Some of them can infect prozzoa as well but most of them will affect animal cells okay or I guess prozzoa you don't find the lipid uh envelope viruses with bacteria you don't find them with plant cells you don't find them with fungal those viruses infect fungi because all of those others have cell walls you find envelope viruses associated with those cells that don't have cell walls. Okay? And why is that, you might ask? Because when they exit the host cell, they take some of the membrane with them, okay, of the host cell. And that's actually what the lipid envelope is. It's membrane from the host cell. So have a look at it and you'll actually see it's it's a lipid billayer. And when we deal with membranes that will be Friday, um you'll see they're all lipid billayers. Okay? And we'll look the structure of those. So, it's basically the same as a membrane, a cytoplasmic or a cell membrane on a cell. Okay? And most of those that have lipid, those viruses that have lipid envelopes are the ones that will um infect cells without cell walls, such as your animal cells, such as many of your um protozoa as well. You will never find a lipid envelope with a bacterial virus. Okay. Or bacteriaage because all back well nearly all bacteria have cell walls. We'll see why that's the case in a moment. Okay. So let's have a look at some sizes of viruses. Okay. Some just a few examples here. Our some of our smallest ones or if not the smallest is polio virus. Okay. It's a very small virus. Um and you'll notice that the smaller viruses here, the first two are singlestranded RNA viruses. So Generally speaking, your RNA viruses are smaller than your DNA viruses, particularly the doublestranded DNA virus. They're typically much larger viruses, more complex viruses. Okay, so a small one, polio virus here obviously infects humans. Trying to get my pointer moving. It has a mind of its own this pointer. Okay, so genome size quite small. Um the size of the virus itself quite small, 30 nanmters. Okay. Then we go to a tobacco mosaic virus. Again, a little bit bigger but long and quite thin. Okay. As we saw, being a helical shaped virus, small genome size, in fact, even smaller than polar virus. Now, we get to a couple that are a lot larger. A T4 virus as it's called. And that's one that infects um E.coli. And that's probably one of the most studied of all viruses in the laboratory. And Okay, some of the some of the human viruses are well studied as well. But in terms of doing experiments and finding out about viruses, infection processes and so forth, a lot of work was done with E.coli T4 virus with E.coli. Okay, because E.coli is our basically our our workhorse in the laboratory. Um, so E.coli or isola is the host. Okay, double stranded DNA virus. So much larger. Okay. Okay, so 200 by 90 genome size much larger 170,000. And then there's variola virus which is smallox virus and it's a complex virus um as far as the structure goes. So it's a lot larger as is mimi virus. It's also a complex virus. Okay. So we see here enveloped both enveloped and both complex virus. Okay. So we look at the bottom one mimi virus which is quite a large virus 400 nanmters. in size. So, we're getting up towards what we you can nearly see with a with a light microscope. Okay? So, think 04 uh micrometers. That's above the limits of a light microscope. So, you can probably see your mimi virus. Okay? Looking like a small probably like a small bacterium down a light microscope. Again, double stranded DNA and quite a large genome. Okay? So, that's again rivaling some small bacteria. In fact, just as big as some small bacterial genome sizes and there's just a comparative to E.coli E.coli cell pox viruses quite large such as our small pox virus here uh bacteriaes such as our T4 here adeno viruses as respiratory viruses paramixi paramixo viruses to viruses herpes viruses and our smaller ones rear virus the corona virus We'll have a look at some of those as we go along. Some examples of some of those and tobacco mosaic virus there long and thin relative to E.coli. Now, one of the largest viruses we know of is one called Pandora virus. Okay, so um and it's actually 1.2 micrometers in size. And yes, you can clearly see it under a light microscope. Not that I've ever had one and seen it, but um our you can get photos of it under a light micro cope this under electron microscope. So it looks almost like a bacterial cell. Um and it would you could very well mistake it for a bacterium cell cuz 1.2 micrometers is getting close to your average bacterial size. So um it's it's quite a large as in microbiology. There's exceptions to everything. So there are going to be be viruses you're going to see with a light microscope. Classification. How do we classify our viruses? Okay, generally speaking, we classify them according to their genome. Okay, all their nucleic acid characteristics. Are they DNA, RNA, double stranded, single strand? That's often the first um step of classification of of viruses. We take into a few we take into account a few characteristics of the virus. Other than that, what type of host it infects? Are they human viruses? Are they animal viruses? Are they uh specific for bacteria? Are they specific plants? Okay, so characteristics of the host, the size of them. Okay, so some of them are are named according to size like that pic um pico RNA virus actually. So pico meaning very small RNA RNA virus. So that's how that was named and we'll have a look at naming a couple more in a moment. And the capsid, what sort of shape is the capsid? Is it icosahhedral? Is it helical? Or is it complex as well? Okay, so they all go into our classification system of our viruses and whether they have a lipid envelope as well. But that'll also come back to um link in with the type of host that's infected as well. When we group them, normally the highest the the committee for viral taxonomy these days is is like procariats is changing some of the naming of of viruses. In the past, we've only had up to orders was the highest group, but they're phase in kingdoms filer so to fit with li um with microorganisms okay so to fit with that classification system so they're going to come up with classification system where there's about 15 different levels which is um not that I'm a verologist but that's going to be pretty annoying I would imagine for verologists trying to remember all those names okay so um but we're just going to stick with the order highest level is order okay so verali's is um if it ends in you know it's an order ends in birid you know it's a family we won't worry about subf family and a species always ends in virus okay and then you have subspecies as well so so you go from kingdom um film order uh classes orders much like we have with with um um our procariots and ukariots then you go down to families subfamilies genera species subspecies etc okay so virus are going to have much the same classification system as as our microorganisms or as our organisms in general. Okay, so we know our um influenza virus is part of the family orthomixo veririd ortho mix. Okay, so break it up into syllables to say it. Okay, it's a mouthful otherwise. Um we know our our genus influenza virus one word is a genus influenza So virus A is genus and just to confuse things the species is influenza A virus. So it does confuse issues. Fortunately there's only one species within the genus influenza virus A genus. There is only the one species influenza A virus. Okay. So it does get a bit confusing viruses. Maybe they're going to try and make it a little bit easier um by redoing the classification system. Hope Y anyway cuz it is a bit confusing. Um naming of viruses name viruses can be named after the characteristics or where they're isolated from or the disease they cause. Okay, much like with our bacteria as we saw in the workshop, they can be after diseases characteristic of the bacterium. Viruses very similar. Okay, so they can be named after where they first found such as Ebola virus. Ebola virus if you didn't know that there's a river, the Ebola River. in Zire in Africa and that's where Ebola the first outbreak of Ebola occurred back in late 1970s. Okay. So um hence that's why it was named Ebola virus. West Nile virus it first outbreak of it um it's um it was first found uh back in the 1930s I think that one was um and first outbreak was near the Nile River in Uganda. near the West Nile community. Okay, so obviously the western side of the the Nile River in Uganda and hence got the name West Nile virus. Um bit more notoriety about that one is that there has been quite numerous outbreaks in the US. Okay, starting in 1999. Okay, so between the 1930s and 1999 there wasn't much known about Westnile virus but a lot more known these days. or can be named after the disease it causes tobacco mosaic virus because the disease looks um like a mosaic shape on the tobacco leaf. Okay. So when it infects the the tobacco leaf, there's a distinct area where it's discolored the um the tobacco leaf and um hence why it got the name tobacco because it infects the tobacco plant. It causes tobacco mosaic disease as it's called and with that mosaic pattern. Okay. So it's a big problem to the tobacco industry um if it takes hold and causes a disease um in the plants. Um hepatitis virus, hepatitis A in particular, hep there's hepatitis A, B, C, etc. Okay, so they're all different viruses. Hepatitis A is the named after the disease. Hepatitis just simply means inflammation of the liver. Okay, so the different viruses are coded according to A B C D E etc. Okay. And that's how they're named. Okay. It's a little bit confusing as we'll have a look at that actually in the workshop. Hepatitis viruses and why they are confusing or they can be how they look such as corona virus or corona vir. The family corona just means crownlike. So they have a crownlike appearance because they have these spike proteins which would jut out and it almost looks like a crown on the virus. Okay, so hence why they got called um corona veririd or corona virus. Okay, so like our our SARS corona virus um or picorn verirday so that's the one I showed you earlier very small one the small that's what polio belongs to u polio virus belongs to pico meaning small RNA virus and birida is just the family okay Okay, so they're very small RNA viruses. Okay, so they can be named that way as well. The way we do classify them is according to what's called the Baltimore classification system. It's named after a biologist named David Baltimore who in the 1970s and 1980s put together a classification system based on the genome of the of the and the and the processing of that genome in viruses. Okay, so separate them into seven broad groups. Okay. And the Baltimore classification system is based on the type of genome, DNA, RNA, single strand, double stranded, how that genome is replicated and how they produce their messenger RNA or how it is produced within the cell that messenger RNA so that the proteins can be produced okay or that messenger RNA can be translated to to produce the proteins for the for the virus. Okay, so just to go over what you probably already know, um processing of DNA within a cell, DNA is replicated. Okay, so think of a a typical bacterial cell. DNA will be replicated when the cell is growing, okay, to make um copies of that DNA. It's transcribed to produce messenger RNA and messenger RNA is a fivep prime to threep prime um orientation. Okay, so remember back um in module one when I spoke about um DNA and five prime to threep prime and threep prime to five prime. Okay, so messenger RNA is always five prime to three prime orientation and then messenger RNA is translated to proteins within the cell. Okay, so that's something fairly basic in biology. Um the nucleotide When I say five prime to three prime, I mean the spot on the carbon of the ribbo sugar. Okay, so five prime. Okay, so that means the start of the in terms of messenger RNA, the messenger RNA is at this point here at the five prime. Okay, and then it will um continue and be polymerized this way from the three prime that'll connect to another five prime that'll connect to another three prime et Okay. So, it starts with the five prime. Okay. And we'll end with a three prime like this with nothing attached to it. Okay. So, that's our five prime to three prime. The other thing I want to just go over again again you probably know this but semiconservative replication when DNA is replicated in a cell it is replicated by what a term called semiconservative replication which means the DNA strands separate and each strand acts as a template to produce another double stranded DNA. Okay, so the five prime to threep prime which is a light green one, light green strand here, it um acts a template for another three prime to five prime strand. So to complete your DNA molecule and then the threep prime to five prime the darker green strand here in your DNA acts as a template to produce another five prime to three prime strand. and and so on until you get lots of um replication of DNA. Okay, so that's basically how DNA is replicated. So each strand acts as a template to produce another strand. That's called semiconservative replication. And again, I showed you this in the last module. Again, our five prime there, five prime starting end connects at three prime connects to another fivep prime. That three prime will connect to another five prime until it ends and there's nothing connected. to the last three prime. Okay, that's our five prime to three prime end and our three prime to five prime is a reverse. Okay, so where it starts with the three prime and ends with the five prime which is complimentary strand. Okay, so we have one strand in our DNA that's five prime to three prime. Complimentary strand is three prime to five prime. Okay. All right. Why am I telling you all of this? Because it's important when we come to looking at viruses. Okay, we call the fivep prime to threep prime direction or orientation of a strand as positive sense. Okay, we call the threep prime to fivep prime orientation negative sense. Okay, so that's really important because when you have the genome of viruses, they can be either positive sense or negative sense if they're single stranded RNA or DNA. Okay, and that's sign ificant because that's significant on how they're going to replicate their genome and how they're going to produce their messenger RNA within the cell. All right? So, we refer to them as either positive sense, so if we have an RNA single strand RNA virus, we might refer to it as a positive sense single stranded RNA virus or as a negative sense singlestranded RNA virus. So, when I say that, you'll know that the positive sense one has the RNA in a fivep prime to threep prime direction. and the negative sense will have the RNA in a threep prime to fiveP prime direction. Okay, messenger RNA is always a positive sense RNA molecule, meaning that it's always five prime to threep prime direction. Okay, so that's where that fits in with our Baltimore classification system. And this is what the Baltimore classification system looks like. Really, I I want to know what how the Baltimore classifi classification system is is um how it divides the viruses into those groups and what's the basis for it type of genome how they replicate that genome and how they produce their messenger RNA from that genome okay so that's really all I need you to know I don't want you to memorize all these individual groups class one class 2 class 3 class 4 class 5 class 6 class 7 because that'll just overload you. Okay, trying to decipher all of this. I'll quickly go through it just to give you an idea of what they all are, but it's um yeah, to try and remember it all is is pretty difficult. Okay, so our class one class one we see are double stranded DNA viruses. Okay, I know it says class one and class 7, but we'll start with class one. Double stranded DNA viruses. Okay, such as our bacteria T4. Okay, so it just has a genome as double stranded DNA much like a cell does. Okay. The DNA is replicated to make more copies of DNA by the semicconservative replication process as a cell would as I just showed you on the previous slide. Okay, that's how a cell does it. That's how the class one viruses do it. They replicate their DNA by semiconservative um replication. Okay, the negative strength or the minor strand if you like which so the negative strand okay so the three prime to five prime strand will act as um will act to um be transcribed to produce messenger RNA complimentary strand the positive strand okay so the negative strand of the DNA will act as a template to produce positive strand messenger RNA okay that's much how a cell is okay so if you're not sure of that well I suggest go back to I think it was chapter six I mentioned to have a look at if you're unsure about all of that in brock biology microorganisms or chapter 4 I think it was in the previous edition okay so go back over that if you're not sure on how um messenger uh DN DNA is transcribed to messenger RNA okay so it's much like a normal cell okay so class two now we're getting to different types of genomes to what cells are single stranded DNA a positive sense which means it's a five prime to threep prime direction. Okay. So what has to happen here for DNA uh replication again it's um semicconservative it's set the positive sense here is uses a template to produce a negative sense d uh produce a negative sense strand of DNA. Okay. And then you end up with a double stranded DNA intermediate at that point. Okay. Because you have the positive sense you're synthesizing the ative sense and then that negative sense can be used to again produce the messenger RNA much like with class one class three this one's a double stranded RNA virus okay so this time we have doublestranded RNA positive and negative sense five prime to three prime three prime to five prime much like you'd have DNA but this time it's RNA okay so it gets synthes it gets replicated it gets trans uh you get transcription occurring um from the from the negative sense um strand of the RNA to produce a positive strand of RNA which is your messenger RNA. Okay, so you get transcription of the negative strand of RNA to produce your messenger RNA. Okay, with the replication, okay, so you get that transcription occurring as well of the negative sense strand and then you get reverse transcription to produce a positive strand and you end up with your double stranded um RNA class four single stranded RNA positive sense. So it's your five prime to threep prime direction. Okay, so you've just got that one strand there and that because it's a positive sense single stranded RNA, it can act directly as messenger RNA because it is a messenger RNA. It works as a messenger RNA. Okay, it um is replicated now um class 4 down here is replicated singlestranded RNA is is trans is um made the negative sense is made okay and that acts as a template to make more of the positive strand of genome okay so it synthesize the negative strand and then we'll will synthesize that that will be template to make more of the positive strand class five single stranded negative sense okay so such as your influenza virus okay so it gets transcription of that negative strand. Uh it acts a template to produce a positive strand of RNA and that's your messenger RNA. Okay. The genome itself it makes the positive sense um single stranded RNA. Okay. So it makes the five prime to threep prime direction and then that is used a template to make more of the negative strand. Class six which is a single stranded positive sense retrovirus this time. So it's different to the singlestranded positive sense class 4 here. This time it's a retrovirus. Okay, which means it's it is a single stranded RNA virus positive sense but instead of the the um RNA used being used directly as a messenger RNA it makes a DNA doublestranded DNA intermediate. So it uses reverse transcripttoise which means it gets syn it gets a double strand DNA synthesized from that single stranded R RNA molecule. Okay. And you end up with a double stranded DNA. And all retroviruses this occurs in at at some stage through their um synthesis. They'll produce double stranded DNA. And then that will act the negative strand will act to produce messenger RNA much like class one. And um as well the the singlestranded RNA is transcribed to produce a a negative strand of double stranded DNA in the replication and then you get the single stranded RNA positive sense produced from that okay as a template to produce a positive sense single stranded RNA and then our last group is class 7 and these are hepatiruses class seven over here these are hpadna viruses and these are transcribed So these produce also uh produce um or transcription through reverse transcription. So they produce the messenger RNA much like a a cell would from the negative strand of the double stranded DNA. They produce the messenger RNA. Then they use reverse transcript basease to then produce the double stranded DNA from that as a template. Okay? So they're all different there. As I say, I don't need you to know all those details. I just want you to know the difference between them in terms of um how we classify the differences in terms of uh genome type, how they produce their messenger RNA and how they replicate their genome. Okay. Okay. So let's have a look at viral evolution now when viruses um first appeared. Okay. So we don't know exactly much like evolution of bacteria, evolution of procarots when life first evolved on earth which we're doing last uh last Monday. Okay. So, let's extend this to viruses now. Okay. So, the question is, is it chicken or egg? Did the viruses come first or did the cellular organisms come first? Okay. That we don't know for sure. There are a couple of theories, couple of possibilities how viruses evolved. Okay. So, the most likely view at this time is that the second one here that viruses were one stage part of the RNA world. Okay, so remember we looked at um the coming together of prebiotic compounds to the RNA world when RNA was a genome of of um of our early organisms before Luca, last universal common ancestor. It's thought that perhaps at some stage they were part of the RNA world and lost the ability to replicate. Okay. And then became more infectious instead. Okay, so I guess that ties in um with the bottom point as well that viruses were the first firms of life if you like predating your earliest cells in terms of your earliest DNA based cells. They were part of the RNA world. So that's one possibility. Okay. And that's I guess the more um more popular view is that they were part of the RNA world. and they just didn't go on to to end up as as cellular forms, but they maintained that RNA molecule and eventually surrounded by a protein coat and and eventually um mutating into into DNA viruses as well. So RNA viruses most likely the earliest types of virus and then later evolving into DNA viruses or and maintaining the RNA viruses. Okay. And they and because they couldn't replicate themselves. They lost the ability to replicate. They required a host cell in order to replicate. Okay, so that's the most popular um possibility. The other possibility is that they came after the first cells, but what we do know is that they're around a similar time as the earlier cells. Okay, so um evidence suggests that they were around that time of of um the last universal common an or when life first evolved. But there is a bit of a gap there knowing for sure whether they were came just after or just before or exactly the same time as the first life evolved because um that could have occurred over over millions of years. Okay. So the other possibility is that they might have been remnants of the earlier cells. Okay. So and and again just lost that ability to to carry out metabolic processes and eventually required a host cell in order to to infect and be able to to replicate and and be maintained over time. Okay? So, we don't know for sure, but the one thing we do know is they've been around as long as cells. Okay? So, but whether they came before cells or just after cells, that's what we don't know. Okay. Why did they disappear? Okay. Or why did they appear, I should say? Um, it's probably because they they were it's believed that they're important in that conversion of RNA to DNA in the cells. Okay, so they may well have converted that RNA to DNA within the virus before it actually happened in cells. Okay, so from your RNA life to your DNA life. Yep.
To a host cell. Yes. Yes. Cuz they're going to do some amount of damage to the host cell because they're multiplying inside. Okay. So whether they kill that host cell or just damage that host cell in some way, yes, they will all be harmful. Okay. So um the belief is they might have appeared to enable that movement from RNA to DNA. Okay. And to actually enable the movement of genes from one cell to another. Okay? Because that's a way we do get movement of genes, transfer of genes these days. We know that um well and truly. Okay? So these days it's one of the gene transfer mechanisms through a virus transduction it's called. Okay, I want to have a look at um bacteria and bacteria the viruses that infect bacteria. Okay, as I said they can be single stranded RNA, double stranded RNA, single strand DNA, double stranded DNA. Okay, so like any virus, they can be one of those four possibilities. Okay, again the RNA virus are typically a lot smaller than the DNA virus, whether they be single strand or are single stranded or double stranded DNA virus a little bit bigger and the largest of them are the DNA viruses such as these ones here. Okay, so quite unique structures some of the bacteria viruses this one's the most wellstied and one of the most well studied of all viruses cuz it's our T4 virus. Okay, it looks almost like a robot or as it's often said that it's um looks like a um one of the moon or Mars rovers um looking something like those but looks more like sort of robotic if you like. Okay. So the head is the icosahhedral structure and obviously where the genome is kept inside this protein icosahhedral um coat here. Okay. So inside there but it also has these other attachments which are composed of proteins and it has a a collar here and a and a and a helix here and also has a base plate here and has these tail fibers. Okay, so the tail fibers are probably one of the most well probably the most important apart from the genome of the virus because they're what bind to the host cell. Okay, without those tail fibers, the virus won't bind to a host cell. Okay, so it needs those to bind and then after that it can inject its genome into the host cell. Okay, the infection process. Okay, so typical infection process of a bacteria and similar to animal viruses we'll look at. when we get to animal viruses. Okay, so it's your virus multiplication. That's the infection process. Very specific from virus to host cell. Okay, so it's quite specific. Um a virus will attack a particular host cell. So there's viruses out there for all your different bacteria, lots of virus for animal cells and so forth. Okay, so lots of different one out there and they're quite specific in what they'll attack or what part for instance with us, what part of the body they'll attack, the respiratory system or somewhere else. Um so it depends on the virus depends on its its um its um spike proteins and in this instance the tail fibers with the with the uh viruses. So it's a similar process but a little bit different as we'll see later on. Okay. So we're going to deal with proariots first. Okay. So with a proariote only the genome enters the host cell. Okay. So when you have bacteria infecting a bacterium only the genome goes in. All right. Not the whole virus which which is can be different with our animal cells, which it would make sense. Your bacteria are pretty small. So, they can't fit wouldn't be able to fit um too much too many viruses in there, okay? Cuz often you get simultaneous infection from more than one virus, okay? So, if it if they're trying to get in there and they won't fit through the cell wall anyway in the bacteria. So, the it's only the genome that goes in of the genome of the virus. So, you can have virolent viruses which have a litic cycle. Okay. So, Again, somewhat similar to animal viruses, but a little bit different. Okay, this whole process is pretty similar, but the the steps are a little bit different. Okay, so what happens with your virolent virus is that you have your virus attaching to the surface of the host cell. Okay, so in this instance, it's non-enveloped and the the um the protein co or the capsime act as act to bind to the receptors on the host cell. So they bind to the receptors on the host cell. it then um inserts its genome into the host cell. Okay. So you get penetration of the genome into the host cell. Then you start to get replication of the genome, synthes or transcription of the genes and synthesis of proteins, translation of the proteins from the messenger RNA. Okay. So you end up with the parts to the virus all being produced inside the cell. They get assembled inside the host cell and you get assembly pack packaging of the new virus and then you get release of the virus. Most times you'll get or nearly all the time the bacteria will lies which means it'll break open when the viruses are exiting. Okay? Because again it has that cell wall. So it's going to break that cell wall. The the cell gets very fragile once the cell wall is broken open and will usually lice as a result. So and you end up with many viral particles coming out. Okay just very quickly there's a bit more detail on it. We go into that in too much detail because we haven't done membranes and walls and so forth in our in our bacteria yet which we'll do um starting on Friday. Okay. So flea and some of the other structures like fleella and pilli and so forth and transport proteins we're yet to get to yet but a fleellum is um for movement in bacterial cells and it is composed of protein subunits and the virus can can attach to those protein subunits and they be the receptors on the virus. injects its genome through the fleella which is hollow and into the host cell. A pillis also is hollow and it's used for connecting between bacteria um in gene transport processes and they can they can bind to the and again made up of protein subunits. They can attach to the pillis and again it's hollow so it can they can inject their genome through the pill or they can they can attach to um transport proteins again injected through that transport protein. But often there are times they'll need lysosyme to get through the cell wall in that instance. Also they can attach to to glyoproteins which might be in the outer membrane of some bacteria and again they'll need lysosyme to get through that cell wall. That thin layer is a cell wall and lysosyme will break that down or break put a hole in it basically um what's pepidoglycan it's also called and that will enable them to um put their um penetrate their gene into the host cell. Okay, here we can see some photos of bacteria. So, as I said, it's normally not one virus attached into a host cell. There's often many. Okay, and generally um it's a lot more efficient just for them to put their genome into the host cell and then start to synthesize the parts. And you can see some viral particles being put together inside this host cell. Okay, so they'll they'll multiply at a very quick rate and then you'll get lices when they're released. Here you can clearly see in this cell here the viral particles have been synthesized or assembled inside the host cell parts would have been synthesized and you're getting a viral particles assembled and it won't be too long before this bacterium lizes and you get release of the viral particles and this time it's a scanning electron microraph and all those white dots on the surface of the of the cell of the E.coli cells there are the viral particles. Okay, so probably injecting the the genome into the into the host cell. Okay, again, same sort of thing. I won't dwell on this one. Again, the tail fibers attach to the receptors on the host cell. The virus lowers, starts to inject its genome, okay, through a core, which um as I say has loyal, puts a hole in the cell wall, injects the genome or the the DNA in the case of um these viruses, a T4 virus, double stranded DNA virus. injects his DNA into the host cell. Again here um we see it okay lazy putting a hole in the cell wall there because this is a cell wall layer the pepto glycan layer and through the genome goes okay some electron microraphs there. Okay so the overall process of um viral multiplication inside a host cell virus um infects the host cell goes into the host cell you start to get synthesis of parts of the virus where you start to get replication of the genome or the nucleic acid of the virus. You get transcription of the the DNA to RNA and you get translation of the RNA to to the proteins. They all get produced. You still don't see any um increased numbers of viruses but the parts are being made and then when it starts to get packaged you get a rapid increase in the number of viruses and you get assembly of the virus and then you get release through life of the host cell. In some instances budding. Not so much budding in bacteria, but as we'll see, most of it's budding in in animal cells. Okay. How long does this take? Typical bacteria such as for E. coli can take um as quick as about 30 minutes to go from one virus infecting to um many many viruses being produced and being released from the host cell. So, it's a very quick process uh for bacteria particularly ecoli as I say most studied of them all. Um, other types of viruses are temperate viruses or lysogenic. I'll just do these then we'll have a break for a couple of minutes. Um, temperate viruses. Um, so that's the other type of virus you can have. So you have your virulent viruses or litic as it's called what we've just seen. The other type of virus you have is a temperate virus or lizogenic virus. This shows you both cycles. Here's a litic cycle. Okay, so injection of the genome. Okay, so there's the genome. the virus it starts to be uh replicate transcribe producing more viral particles lices of the host cell release of the viral particles okay so that's a litic cycle we've just seen the lizogenic cycle a little bit different so the viral genome goes into the host cell instead of it reproducing the viral particles here that um that viral genome then becomes integrated into the host cell's chromosome or genome okay to the host cell's chromosome it will become integrated so obviously to carry out a temperate or a lysogenic cycle a temperate virus needs to be a doublestranded DNA virus okay can't be anything else or needs to be a double strand DNA virus at some stage through its through its cycle okay so because it needs to integrate to the double stranded DNA chromosome of host cell. Okay. So that's why it needs to be double stranded DNA otherwise it can't integrate. Once it integrates we call it a proage. Okay. So if you um do sequences of genomes of bacteria you're always seeing profages. They are very common in bacteria and they just remain dormant. So the bacteria can keep growing and growing and multiplying quite happily not be affected. But it's got this virus genome a virus uh yeah or viral genome within its own genome. Okay. is in its own chromosome. All right? So you see as a proofage, you always find proofages when you do bacterial genome sequences, the sequencing the whole genome. Okay? So it gets multiplied at some stage. It will excise from the chromosome of the host cell. Okay? The cell might be under stress, which means it might be away from its optimal growth conditions. It might be lacking nutrients of some sort. It might be too cold for it, too warm for it. uh without killing the cells. Uh so there's usually a reason why they do get stressed and then it will excise. Okay. So it'll excise from the chromosome then it will go into the litic cycle and then you start to get reproduction of the virus synthesis of the virus assembly viral particle uh viral um proteins and replication of the genome assembly of the viral particles and release. Okay. So how long it stays in the isogenic cycle. Who knows? Could be anything from um hours through to weeks uh through to days through to weeks through to years possibly depending on on the organism. And this also happens with animal viruses. Well, some animal viruses and I'll point those out. Obviously, double stranded DNA animal viruses, not all, but some of them. And it's a really important um latent period within viral infections. Okay. All right. We'll have a break for five minutes. Just a few multiple choice questions you can have a look at there during a 5m minute break we'll have and we'll come back and answer those to see if you can answer those during our break inside this trash. Okay, we might um move on then. Okay, so very quickly just left you with these four questions if you can answer these. Question one, all viral particles are smaller than bacterial cells, contain an envelope to prevent degradation outside of a host, contain DNA, their genome, or metabolically inert. Okay, who thinks A, B, C, D? Okay. and D it is. Okay, so the majority said D. Okay, they're not all smaller than bacterial cells as it said it is. Remember I gave an example of a couple that are larger. Okay, so like your Pandora virus, your mimi virus. Okay, so they're larger than bacterial cells. So it's all but we know all are metabolically inert. They don't carry out metabolism themselves. Question two, viral genomes can be linear or circular, double strand or single stranded composed of RNA or DNA or all of the above. Okay. Who thinks A, B, C, D? Yeah, everyone's fine with that one. Okay. So, they are can be linear or circular. They can be double strand of obviously double strand or single strand or DNA or RNA. Obviously, by process of elimination, it's all of the above or process of more than one, right? Um, it's all of the above. Question three, which of the following is primarily responsible for the shape of a varon. A the size of the viral genome, b the capsid, c the type of host infected, or d the type of nucleic acid in the genome. Okay, who thinks A, B, C, D. Okay, it is the capsit. Okay, so the majority of you are right on that. Okay, so it's a capsuit because it's a solid structure, the protein coat. Okay, so um yeah. Even with a lipid envelope around they still maintain that shape with the capsided shape. Okay. And the last one which is not true regarding temperate viruses there are only DNA viruses or viruses that produce DNA at some stage through their infection cycle. B the genome of a temperate bacteria inserts into a host chromosome and it's called a proofage. C they always kill a host once the infection begins. Or D the profile can provide genes in the lizogenic cycle and give new abilities to the host. Okay, which is not true of these? Is it A, B, C, D? Okay. And I think most of you got that one right as well. They'll all they don't always kill their their host. Okay. So, they um they need to be DNA viruses. Either are DNA viruses or have DNA produced at some stage during the infection cycle. Um it is in a bacteria it is inserted into the chromosome called a profage. They don't always kill their host. They can remain dormant for long periods and they can provide genes. They can carry genes the bacteria um the the bacteria um and and that can then go into the to the chromosome of the host bacterium. So they can carry genes from one source to another. As I said that's a process called trans uction we'll look at later on. Okay, so that's good. Most of you got those right. So they're hopefully fairly straightforward. Okay, so let's move on to animal viruses. Again, the same thing. I'm not expecting you to know all of these. Okay, so that's a bit of a um bit much to me for me to ask you to remember all these names and all the groups of them. Okay, but this just gives you a broad view of what we have as animal viruses and what the major groups are. Okay. So, u most of the rep there are representatives in most of these group that are human viruses. You'll see the the family name here, DNA viruses up the top, RNA viruses down the bottom, uh yeah, family name across here, and the Baltimore class down the bottom. Okay, so most of the Baltimore obviously the Baltimore class will differ from the top ones to the bottom ones because RNA and DNA viruses will differ. Okay, so some of the I guess some of the more severe infections we get from viruses come from RNA viruses if anything. Okay. So our DNA viruses. Okay. So um we have um pmpilloma virus here. Okay. Obviously human pamploma um disease comes from here. Okay. So I mentioned that one earlier. Um cause can cause cancers. Um sexually transmitted infection causes genital warts as well but only in rare cases will it cause cancers. Um herpes okay so herpes viruses saw um herpes simplex again sexually transmitted infections um chickenpox belongs to that group as well. Okay so your herpes viruses um let's pull out some others hepatiruses here or hea DNA viruses obviously DNA virus heer meaning to affect the liver. So um some of your hepatitis um viruses are here but not all of them actually. So some of your hepatitis um others pox viruses I mentioned those earlier pox virus because of their complex shape small pox monkey pox is another one we've seen recently belong to the pox viruses um and we go down to our RNA virus picorn uh verirday family mentioned that one earlier because it has polio virus in it. Has also virus that can cause hep um um hepatitis A I think's in that group and also um viruses that can cause menitis as well. Khesi virus I think kesi virus has your um um your what's it called? The um um norovirus. That's the one I'm trying to think of. Neurovirus which which is the number one one cause of um gastroenterteritis. Okay, over all your bacteria, over all your salmonellas and so forth. Noro virus is number one and it's part of this family here. Flavor virus have quite a few important ones. Japanese encphilitis we've heard of recently. Um some others like um deni fever in that grouping. Um Zika virus another one part of that grouping. West Nile virus one I mentioned earlier as well part of the the flav virus grouping to viruses I think that's Ross River fever is part of toga viruses retroviruses HIV is part of retroviruses and one we'll look at later on um as far as the helical structure the helical structure viruses here filo viruses has some of the most um um uh most wor I guess worse viruses in terms of the the the effect of the virus um like your Ebola like your hivirus as well belong to felo. Um orthomixo that's where influenza sits in. Um what are some other ones? Paramixo there's some important ones in paramixo. Um ones like um um your measles, mumps, uh what else is in paramixo? Hendravirus, nipper virus as well. Another one that's um created a bit of news lately. Um so some important ones in those groups. So as I said, I'm not expecting you to know those, but some of the more important um ones in terms of the ones that affect us as humans in some of those groups and as I say probably the more severe viruses in terms of not saying that some of these aren't but more more of the more severe ones in the RNA viruses that affect us okay so let's have a look at animal virus infection and that includes humans virus that infect humans okay so that was again quite specific the virus to the host cell okay So um they'll bind to receptors as the same with the bacteria binding to bacterial cells. Animal virus binding to animal cells or human cells will bind by receptors. Okay. And being quite specific. Okay. So and specific as well as far as us and animals go um to to the types of organs they'll bind to as well. Okay. Or the cells the tissue cells they'll bind to. Okay. So that that's quite different as well. Um another difference or a key difference between the the um infection of animal cells and the infection of bacterial cells is that generally the whole virus or most of the virus will go into the animal cell. Okay. Sometimes you will get just the genome going in the viral genome going into the host cell such as this case. Okay. So the virus binds to the the host cell here and we'll inject the genome. These are non um envelope viruses that this will occur with. Okay. So, these won't be enveloped because they're not taking any of the membrane when they exit the host cell. Okay. Oh, sorry. Sometimes they can. Yeah, sometimes they can. They're not just just not um um the membrane not going into the host cell when they bind. Sorry. Um which happens with a lot of envelope viruses. Okay. So, um the genome goes into the host cell. Eventually, it'll make make its way into the nucleus of the host cell. Okay? And then you'll get if it's double stranded DNA in this instance, one strand will go act as a template. The positive strand will act as a template as messenger RNA will act as messenger RNA I should say rather than a template. And the the negative sense strand will act as a template to produce more of the positive strands. And um and then the positive strands again will act as a template to produce more of the negative strand. So you end up with a double stranded DNA uh double strand RNA. the virus as a result. Okay, so the virus genome goes into the nucleus of the host cell. Okay, so it'll always go into the nucleus because that's where it'll be u transcribed uh and replicated there. Okay, so the possibilities of of um animal viruses entering a host cell. Okay, so the genome itself can go in but that's relatively rare. Okay, that's not very common in animal viruses. So it's a lot different to bacteria where it happen happens just about in all bacterial um infections. Okay, it's relatively rare in animal viruses. Okay, so that can go in the most common the two most common is through membrane fusion or through endoccytosis. Membrane fusion is where you have your envelope virus and that envelope um merges with the cytoplasmic membrane of the host cell. Okay, so it fuses basically with the host host cells cytoplasmic membrane. So here it binds the receptors and it starts to fuse and merge with the host cells cytoplasmic membrane. Okay. And there and then what goes in is the capsid or the nucleio capsid if you like which is the the genome surrounded by the protein coat. Okay. And the lipid envelope remains as part of the membrane there. Okay. Once it gets into the cytoplasm of the host cell it is uncodated which means the protein coat is removed and then releasing the viral genome and then that goes into the nucleus. Okay. So it'll go into the nucleus where it is then um um replicated and transcribed. The other way is through membrane endoccytosis I should say and that's that's quite